A graduate level course is scheduled to be taught at Florida Atlantic University in Spring 2019. Here is the proposed lesson plan (for 90 minute lectures). See the **Examples and Tools sections** for several worked out examples. All the books / papers referenced are free to download and are included in the References and Tools sections :
* Lec 1 and 2: preamble: Syllabus, Genomics - history (Ridley/Ch.3: History, as told with Chromosome 3); sequencing [trends and cost](https://www.genome.gov/27565109/the-cost-of-sequencing-a-human-genome/); the future: personalized medicine (Ch. 20/GO Book: Base pairs to Bedside phenotypes). Third part of the genomics revolution is underway at present. Part I: Human genome sequencing (bottom-up; both hypothesis-driven and hypothesis free); Part II: GWAS (hypothesis-free), heitability dilemma, and GO annotations (hypothesis-driven) ; Part III: Middle-out - need both top-down and bottom-up; use both judiciously; hypothesis-free exploration, but on a hypothesis-driven subset. Starting point: Define BP, MF, CC to explore by experimental/ in-vivo/in-vitro/in-silico (Do experimental/clinical case-control study, do protein enrichment analysis; find genes through PANTHER and Pfam); or find genes of intereest from literature. Next: Do Go annotations; Find Go enrichment. Define phenotypes to evaluate; and run experiments. 
* Lec 3- Genome Primer (Page 10 /preface) from M. Ridley's book: Genome - The Autobiography of a Species in 23 chapters; Chapter 1 (The first look at a genome: sequence statistics) from Cristianini and Hahn's book: Introduction to Computational Genomics. GC content mapper and FASTA data format. 
* Lec 4a - Gene Finding (Chapter 2 in C&H on: All the sequence's men - Gene finding). ORF Threshold with ORF Finder; Sequence Alignment (Chapter 3 in C&H on: All in the family - Sequence alignment). PAX and HOX domains in the *eyeless* gene of a fruitfly. Use of GO TermFinder to understand their role in biological processes. Use of AmiGO 2 to browse the GO hierarchy and to determine orthologs. Use of BLAST to compare two orthologs. Relevant 'Examples': Gene Finding; Sequence Alignment 
* Lec 4b - Sequence Analysis for homology and protein superfamily identification - Lectures 1 and 4 of the [NIH series](https://www.genome.gov/12514288/current-topics-in-genome-analysis-2016-course-syllabus-handouts-and-videos/). These are 1 hour video lectures, worth watching. My 'How to' Notes and NIH slides are [here](https://github.com/RShankar/Semantic-Web-for-Genomics/tree/master/NIH%20Lecture%20Series). Look for two folders with 'Sequence Analysis' in their titles. 
* Lec 5 - Gene Ontology (Chapter 2) from Dessimoz and Skunca's book: The Gene Ontology Handbook. Use of GO for enrichment analysis. See the Summaries section for summaries of a book on EST (expressed sequence tags) and enrichment analysis software. See Tools/Papers for the latter paper on software. Relevant 'Examples': GO Ontology. Concept of an Ontology: Explained with ontologies for automobiles and air travel. Pizza and  FAU ontology; WebProtege; OBO and  OWL formates. Relevant 'Examples': Anatomy of a Genome
* Lec 6 - GO Annotations (Chapter 3) from the GO book. See Tools/Papers section for a 2008 paper on  use and misuse of GO annotations. Relevant 'Examples': GO Annotations.
