# Semantic-Web-for-Genomics
* **Objective**: Develop Computational Tools for a Systems Approach to Genomics Analysis
* **Background**: We carry 3 billion base pairs of nucleotides in our nuclear DNA sequence. Only a tiny part of this genome sequence represents protein coding genes, with much of the remainder sequence involved in gene regulation and consequent expressed levels of these proteins. Regulation is a complex process dependent on the tissue type and our individual profile (dietary, lifestyle and environmental factors).   Generally, genomic origins of rare diseases is better understood than for common and complex diseases such as cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and Alzheimer’s, as well as the processes of aging and cell death.   Potential heritability of traits (such as height) and disease risk (as with, say, heart attack) has been determined by twin, family, and ethnic studies, to be around 40 to 60 %, or more. However, heritability as explained by known gene-sequence variants is less than 10 %. Thus the new challenge for bioinformatics is to integrate, and gain insight from, the massive amounts of knowledge and data acquired across species, genes, proteins, and biological processes, as well as clinical studies.  The eventual goal is to provide personalized medicine. The first step, started a decade ago, has been the development and applications of genome and disease ontologies. The second step, started more recently, relates to building genetic architecture and biological pathway models for overlapping and specific aspects of diseases. We are offering a course in spring '19 that will address the first step in more detail, with a brief introduction on the latter at semester end. 
* **Text Book**: :  A free download: Dessimoz, C., and Skunca, N., [The Gene Ontology Handbook](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-1-4939-3743-1.pdf), publishers: Springer Open and Humana Press, 2017. There are many online resources for the genome-related ontologies (GO and BioPAX) and data mining/ inferencing standards and tools to be used: OWL, Protégé, AmiGO 2, and REVIGO.
* **Description**: Our goal here is to document all relevant information for this course, so it is easily accessible.  This is a bioinformatics application course. It represents an *intermediate phase* in the evolution of the field. The *initial phase* has already been completed by the wide research community. This intermediate phase is made possible by the tremendous progress made by researchers everywhere during this initial phase. Even this intermediate phase has already seen strong contributions from researchers around the world. This intermediate phase changes the focus back to basic biology, but with the ability to leverage the big data and knowledge gained so far, to explore limited number of pathways, albeit in a static manner. That is, with the genetic footprint that is (almost) the inherited version. It is hoped that this phase will even cover gene to gene interactions. However, with chronological aging, there will be lifestyle, environmental, and other factors that will influence the known pathways, but also add other pathways, and lead to sub-optimal responses (due to impaired repair and maintenance biological processes). This is considered the *final phase* in our reasoning here, in the sense that any modeling and annotation efforts must now consider these external factors and optimization constraints, as a dynamic sequence of events with the potential for irreversibility. A model developed at this level will be comprehensive, but also computationally demanding. However, if realized, it can help personalize medicine and help each of us at an individual level, in terms of the treatment options and medication regimens chosen for the best possible outcome. A SystemC-based implementation of the dynamic model can lead to synthesized hardware that can complete these computations in real time. 

    *Initial Phase*: Completion of the [draft human genome sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_genome) in 2001 may be considered the beginning of the genomic era. A desire to accelerate knowledge discovery subsequently led to innovations in both **biological sequencing** and **computational techniques**. We consider this as the **initial phase**. Investments by both public and private funding came about for speeding up biological sequencing. This has reduced the cost of genome sequencing faster than the Moore's law for computer hardware (doubling of 'compute power' every two years). The [cost of genome sequencing](https://www.genome.gov/27541954/dna-sequencing-costs-data/) has dropped from $100 M per genome in 2001 to about $1 K per genome in 2017. In parallel, the field of 
['Bioinformatics'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioinformatics) developed. This is the application of computational data science and analytical techniques (pattern analysis, data mining, and machine intelligence algorithms and visualization) for DNA/RNA sequence alignment, gene discovery, and genome assembly. All of this led to practical applications in drug discovery and drug design, especially for [rare genetic diseases](https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/rare-genetic-disorders-learning-about-genetic-disease-979). Many ambitious projects were undertaken to study variations at the human genome level and their causative impact on [common and complex diseases](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature05911), such as heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and lifestyle risk factors (mainly on [obesity](https://www.springer.com/us/book/9781461486411) so far), and [quantitative traits](https://www.nature.com/subjects/quantitative-trait) (including height, weight, and blood pressure, and even behavior). Advanced statistical techniques were adapted for conducting large scale human clinial studies, labeled ['GWAS' (Genome-wide Association Studies)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genome-wide_association_study). Some of the recent ones may have reached study populations of a million human subjects. GWAS  statistically identify **common** (not rare) DNA nucleotide variants associated with a disease, but they cannot on their own specify which genes are causal. This would require a deeper analysis of the biological aspects. Further, the heritability issue, as mentioned above, has led to the speculation that there must be many rare to common variants in the DNA sequence, along with gene-to-gene interactions, and their potential impact on biological pathways, that all must be considered to fully elucidate the [genotype to phenotype](https://useast.ensembl.org/info/website/tutorials/phenotype.html) connection. A good overal reference is the [NIH/NHGRI website](https://www.genome.gov/)

    *Intermediate Phase*: It uses a small standardized vocabulary (the GO ontology) to help lower the barrier for non-biologists to make sense of the Big Data in open source genome and disease repositories. Engineering, nursing, biology, and IT professionals can then apply their perspectives / training to develop innovative approaches and applications. 
