These are graduate student reports from the first course offering on Genonmics Analysis with Gene Ontology (GO). Reports will be on the following topics. Each student has picked a different aspect/sub-disease in the overall category of cardiovascular diseases.  
* Assignment 1: Review literature on experimental and clinical studies to identify key genes that are active in this pathology. One example enclosed (*See Brian Vail's report*). 
* Assignment 2: Perform GO term enrichment analysis to identify the common and rare biological pathways, molecular functions, and cellular components that are involved in this disease process.
* Mid-term Exam: Perform GO term enrichment analysis for GWAS-based list of genes and gene products for obesity. Determine overlap with the student's specific cardiovascular disease/aspect. It is known that obesity is a risk factor in development of cardiovascular diseases, potentially through the paths of inflammation and chronic stress. This exercise may expose such common pathways. 
* Assignment 3: Reverse engineer from the GO ontologies to identify putative set of genes and gene products. Prune the list based on tissue and cellular context. Study the most recent literatures (2016- present) to identify additional genes and gene products to be included, and to discard some earlier ones if necessary. This is based on the fact that GO ontology development is manual curation intensive and may lag a few years behind the literature (*See Brian Lee's report*). 
* Assignment 4: Study epigenomics literature on their specific topic. Compile additional genes and gene products (such as CpG islands, qQTL and pQTL expression levels) and use them to conduct further enrichment analysis.
* Final Report: Combine all of this work to develop an overall hypothesis for biological pathway exploration specific to their topic (disease/aspect)
