One book and one paper are referenced here:
* Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs): Generation and Analysis, Edited by J. Parkinson, 2009
* An Introdocution to effective use of enrichment analysis software, by H. Tipney and L. Hunter, 2010

EST Overview: ESTs are fragments of mRNA seqs derived through single sequencing reactions performed on randomly selected clones from CDNA libraries. As of 2009, over 45 M ESTs had been generated from 1400+ species of eukaryotes. EST projects complement existing genome projects and/or serve as low-cost alternatives for gene discovery. However, with improvements in accuracy and coverage, they are finding applications in phylogenetics, transcript profiling, and proteomics. 

ESTs are 200-800 bps generated from randomly selected cDNA clones. They represent expressed portion of a genome; thus, they are useful for gene id and verification of gene predictions. The EST process starts with initial purification of pools of mRNAs from either a whole organism or specific tissues. mRNAs are isolated based on their 3' poly-A tails (hence their restriction to eukaryotes) and reverse transcribed to create libraries of cDNAs cloned into an appropriate vector. Individual clones from these libraries are selected randomly and subjected to a single sequencing reaction. Bioinformatics pipelines process the raw sequence read to remove low quality seq info and contaminating vector seq. Figure 1.1, page 3 is a good illustration. The purified seq dat is then submitted to the international repository of ESTs - **dbEST**- along with associated metadata. Finally ESTs may undergo postprocessing. For example, they may be clustered on the basis of seq similarity to derive groups of seqs that putatively derive from the same gene. Consensus seqs derived ferom clusters may be further annotated, e.g., via BLAST searches and used to construct querable database such as **PartiTeneDB**. 
