Summary of HapMap 2009 paper on common and rare genetic variants: [URL](https://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/downloads/human/hapmap3.html)

They genotyped 1.6 million common SNPs in ~1.2K individuals from 11 global populations, and directly sequenced ten 100-kilobase regions in 692 (using PCR-Sanger capillay seq analysis). Only common MAF>5% have been well studied; this study focused on SNPs and CNVs (they call them CNPs) in <5% of population. They used the Affymetrix Human SNP array 6.0 (for 1.8526 M sites) and Illumina Human 1M-single beadchip (for 1.199187 M sites) initially applied for 1486 and 1284 samples. The consensus data has 1.44M SNPs that are polymorphic in these populations. *There was a selection bias against rare variants (MAFs of 0.05 to 0.5%), in microarray platforms*. SNPs were discovered from the raw seq data using SNP Detector software. The PCR sequencing had no such bias against rare variants. **As in previous studies, common (MAF >= 5%) and low-frequency (0.5 to 5%) variants account for bulk of the variation. But they also observed  a large # of rare (MAF of 0.05 to 0.5%) and private (singletons and <0.05%) variants**. Each population had ~42-66% of sites with a MAF <5%, compared to 10-13% in the genotyping data; 99% had MAF < 5%. May not be there in earlier dbSNP builds. For CNP: heterzygosity was due to a limited set of common variants. African ancestry members had  a higher CNP variance between any two individuals (160-171) vs the remainder (127-142). *Note: CNP sizes: <1Kb to >100Kb*. The 856 genotyped CNPs == 3.5 Mb (or 0.1% of the human genome), similar to SNP variance. One-third CNPs overlap RefSeq genes, with duplication (not deletion) more likely. 

They used [ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/) data to determine relevance to other populations. Since non-African samples provided a more complete discovery resource for variant sites in non-Africal samples. For low-frequency variants, only closely related populations matched. Gujarithis in Houston, an Indian community, and LWK (Luhya in Webuye, Kenya) were poorly captured by any of their other populations (though for LWK, there was another continental group, MKK - Maasai in Kknyawa, Kenya). In a chapter in Appasani's book, written by Indian authors, the anamoly of highly heterogeneous data from India is well documented. F<sub>ST</sub>, a measure of the degree of population differentiaion, was correlated with ascertainmenat informativeness. The coeff was highly variable from -0.67 to -0.99 for all SNPs, and between -0.51 and -0.97 for low frequency SNPs. 

**Haplotype sharing**: Population genetics predicts that lower-frequency varinats should be typically younger than more common variants, and thus have a longer physical extent of haplotype sharing (*Why is the second part true? - it means that longer sequences are similar*). ... To continue. 
